In this lecture, you'll learn how to unlock ports down to particular MAC addresses with port-security.
So looking in our topology
here, I've got Switch1 and right now PC1 and PC2 are plugged into ports one and two.
I've set the MAC addresses manually for this lab so that we can keep track of things a bit more easily.
So PC1 has got MAC 0.1.1. PC2 is 0.2.2 and PC3, the villain is
0.3.3.
So let's say that this is our bank and we want to lock our parts down to particular hosts.
So first up, I'll lock port fa0/1 down to MAC 0.1.1.
So I'll go on to the switch.
And go to global config.
And then it's interface fa0/1. I need to set switchport mode access first and then
switchport port-security.
So that's just enabled genetic default, port-security on there.
Next up, I want to lock it down to this particular MAC address.
So the command is switchport port-security mac-address.
And it was
0000.1111.1111.
OK, done.
And I'm also going to manually set it to one MAC address as well. So, switchport port-security. Let's
check the command and it's maximum of one.
That was the default anyway.
And if I now do show port-security for the interface fa0/1, I can see that port-security
is enabled and it does have a configured MAC address and that the MAC address is not being learned yet.
If I want to check what the Mac address is, I can do a show port-security address and I can see there's
the MAC address there.
That it is locked to interface fa0/1.
So it hasn't seen the MAC address yet because there hasn't been any traffic coming in yet.
So let's go on to PC1 and I'll ping over to PC2. So ping 10.10.10.11 to generate some
traffic.
And if I now do my show port-security interface again,
I can see that yes, there is a MAC address and the traffic went through
okay. So it's all good.
Now let's say the next thing that happens is we have an attacker that's trying to get onto the network
and what they do is they disconnect the cable that's connected to PC1 and they hooked that up to their PC
instead.
So that was interface fa0/1.
They connect their PC in, which is a different MAC address, which is 0.3.3
in this example. IP address is already configured on here, 10.10.10.12.
So let's see if port-security is going to work or not.
I'll try pinging PC2 from PC3, so I will ping 10.10.10.11 from here and the ping fails,
because port-security locks down the port, because it was not the correct MAC address.
If I look back on the switch again and do my show port-security interface command, I can see that
I've had a violation and that I didn't actually change the MAC address.
And such MAC address is on PC3, which is violating.
It's not 0.1.1. Because it's violating port-security. It has shutdown the interface. So to fix this,
I need to walk down there and then,
take that PC off the network. I didn't mean to delete the whole thing.
Let's try it, delete just the link so I'll uncable it and then cable fa0/1 back up
to PC1.
PC1 is not back on the network yet.
I need to do a shut and a no shut to take it out of error-disabled.
So I go to config t,
interface fa0/1, shutdown,
no shutdown.
And then I will check the state of the interface.
Now for port-security, I can see that it is back up with the correct address of 0.1.1. And let's
just check connectivity as well.
So from PC1, I'll ping PC2 again. We're all good.
We're back where we started.
So that's how you can manually configure the MAC address and interface to lock it down to that one MAC
address.
Next thing to look at is using a sticky address.
But before I show you how sticky address works, I want to demonstrate how this is different
to not putting a MAC address at all, on the interface.
So let's go onto Switch1.
And I'm just going to enable default port-security on here. So I go to global config, interface fa0/2
and then switchport port-security.
And as usual, I forgot to say switchport mode access first. So i'll do that and then try the command again and it will
work. OK.
We now do our show port-security interface fa0/2.
It's going to have the default settings because I didn't configure any of our parameters. And by default,
it only allows one MAC address.
But it doesn't care what that MAC address is because I didn't manually set the MAC address and I haven't
said MAC address sticky.
So you saw in the last couple of lectures
that if I plug a hub or a switch or a wireless access point in here, then there's going to be more
host trying to transmit and it's going to lock the port down.
So what this does is it stops unauthorized devices from getting put on your network, but it doesn't
lock it down to a particular host. To demonstrate that,
let's,
the way the interface, the link going to PC2 and then hook it up to PC3 instead. So fa0/2
connected to PC3 instead.
And if I now go on to PC3, I'll just open that up.
So I go into PC3 and I will ping,
ping 10.10.10.10 which is PC1. The ping succeeds. So it would work from PC2. It would
work from PC3. It would work from any PC. The switch doesn't care which host is plugged in as long as it's only one
host at a time.
So let's say that now,
I do actually want to lock it down to this particular PC, which is PC2.
So let's move the cable back over again,
without deleting that whole host accidentally. So I'll take my cable from fa0/2 in
the switch. Plug it back into PC2.
I've already got port-security configured on the interface, but now I'm going to set MAC address sticky.
So I'll go to global config, interface fa0/2,
switchport port-security mac-address sticky
And what will happen now is, it will learn the MAC address that is plugged in there. So I could generate some traffic
first.
So I'm going to PC2 and I will ping over to PC1.
The ping will work just fine.
And now if I go back on the switch and I do a show port-security for interface fa0/2,
I would see that I've allowed my one MAC address.
And I can see that it's a sticky MAC address now.
And here is the MAC address that was learned, 0.2.2.
So by using sticky, it saves me having it manually figured out what the MAC addresses and manually
type in all of my interfaces, which would be a heap of work.
It automatically learns it, but it doesn't lock it down to this one port now.
So you saw that PC2 is able to communicate.
But if we go back and do the same thing that we did earlier, which was unplug PC2 and then move
the network cable over to PC3.
Well, because I set sticky, it's in, it's only 0.3.3 MAC address that is allowed to talk
on this port.
So if I go on to PC3 and I try to ping PC1 now. So ping 10.10.10.10. The ping is going
to fail.
And then if I go on to Switch1 and do a show port-security interface fa0/2, I see that
there was a violation.
It's not the sticky MAC address
that was learned.
So the port has been shutdown.
OK, so that's it. That's everything about port-security.
You've seen how we can use it to prevent unauthorized devices on the network. Also how we can use it
to lock the port down to our particular MAC address, how we can do that by manually adding MAC addresses,
how we can do it more conveniently by using sticky and also the difference between using a sticky MAC
address and not configuring a MAC address at all.
So that's everything.
See you in the next section.